Welcome to AV testing podcast, your modern testing podcast. Your hosts, Alan and Brent
will be here to guide you through topics on testing, leadership, agile, and anything else
that comes to mind. Now on with the show. Hello again, everyone.
Howdy. We have a guest here today. Say hello.
Hello. This is the one and only, and I'm going
to do my best to get this right. Marit.
I got a B plus. I got, I got a thumbs up. I got a thumbs up. Super happy to have you
here. How are you doing? I'm good. All good. I think everyone who has listened to the podcast
probably knows who Marit is. She's a huge body of work, presentations, papers, books,
blogs. You are, and you've slowed down a little bit over the summer, but you crank out blog
posts like nobody's business. And they're all, it's not like these blog posts that have
a little blurb of, Oh, Hey, I went to the store today and I saw that cheese was, was
really cheap, like in depth, well-written stuff you can learn. Uh, which I just saying
that cause it's not what I want to talk about, but such a breadth of knowledge is what I
want them to say. Huge knowledge of testing and of development. I've had a lot of different
roles, but I'm curious. I know you moved on from F secure a while back where you were
at for a long time, but I'm not sure what you're doing now. So, but how would you do,
what do you do or how would you describe what you're doing now? And maybe I'll just,
we'll, we'll dig into that as we go.
So I took a position as a principal test engineer in a company called Vaisala that does measurement
devices. I kind of wanted to get into the embedded side of it because I haven't done that yet.
And I wanted to figure out if I can still mix up roles even more than I have ever before.
So I figured I'd rather have my foot, like hold on, on testing. That's why that testing part is
there. But the principal part is, is giving me a permission to do whatever I like around
software development, quality, whatever. And my role kind of right now is more like threefold.
I work as a tester in one of the teams, one of the cloud-based teams, but then I work with
the whole product kind of like end to end. I think we have about seven teams in that product.
So, so get to work with all of those teams. And then on top of that, I get to develop
testing around the whole company. We have some hundreds of developer people. So,
so I get to kind of pick and choose what I, what I like to do out of that.
Well, that sounds fun. Not the job for the, for the unexperienced person. It's very similar
to things that I've done as, as Brent will probably tell you, which I love. I'm, I'm,
I'm happy and jealous. And I think it's a great role to get into. How would you,
because I've never had a good answer for this. What if someone comes to you,
Martin says, I want to do what you do. How do they get started?
I have no clue.
I don't either.
It's really difficult actually to say how to do that. I, I think the thing that I needed to learn
the most is that you kind of create a mix of all kinds of things that you don't just get stuck on
one thing, but you create this kind of like, you know, this week I'm doing this and the next week
you make space for doing something completely different. So kind of making sure that you are
never missed in your team, that you don't take a role where you can be away. And for example,
going to conferences was a great way for me to learn to do this, kind of like not to create
that kind of like, you know, I'm the bottle. Like I need to be there for them to release or
any of that. No, they knew that I'm going to be away because I'm going to be traveling all around
the world and speaking conferences. So they needed to kind of figure out how to do things
without me. And it also created this idea that, you know, I can be elsewhere doing something else if,
that was something that I deemed best for the company. And again, there's a lot of people
that I can talk to, to figure out what's best for the company at a given time.
I think you said a lot of, I can't, Brent's picture is so small. I can't see if he smiled,
but a lot of the words we love, like we don't want to be the bottleneck. And your description
reminded me of, we talk a lot about generalizing specialists or specializing generalists and
to me, that's what you described. It's like you're a lot about a little, a little about a lot.
But also like 25 years, you can be a specialist at first and kind of like pick up things here and
there. So it's kind of like this idea that every day when you go to work, you can always learn
something new and it doesn't have to be only about testing. It can be about anything. Like,
if you learn how to cook better, maybe, you know, that might be a useful skill. At least,
you know, you get to eat something good if you learn to do that better. So it's not like you
need only one kind of skills. And in 25 years, I've had quite many days when I go to work
with the attitude of wanting to be something kind of like better than I was before. So I think
that's pretty much how you get to the place, actively learning and volunteering for things.
So many comments and I'm only going to give Brent a chance to interject here, but
I think you and I both contributed to the around the world with 80 software testers book.
And the article I wrote in there is about this exactly about some advice I was given 20 years
ago from a VP at Microsoft said, always put yourself on the steepest learning curve.
And which is not being afraid of my story in there, I won't give the spoilers away, but
just not being afraid to take on new things and like even being aggressive about, Oh, I'll try,
I'll try that and putting yourself in a position where you can try and learn new things
and doing that over and over and over is so valuable. And that's, yeah, I guess I didn't have
a good answer, but now after listening to you, maybe I do have an answer to that question. Just
try new stuff. And that's what's kept me interested in, in, in this field for so long.
Yeah. The, the thing I'm thinking about, right here in Mark talk, it did also reminded me greatly
of sort of the generalizing specialists or specialized in general, you know, whatever you
want to go with the tee sheet person that we talk about so much on the podcast. And
what I find myself thinking is, okay, right. We're, we're all in the industry, 25 plus years,
right. And let's, let's imagine some, some fresh new college student just leaves college,
comes and joins our company and they're like, okay, how do I be like you when I grow up?
And part of me goes, you know what, the context in which we were that fresh out of college,
that world, I don't think exists at all anymore. And so I struggled with that question because
I think the world in which we started that environment was critical to how we got to where
we are today. So part of me thinks, okay, you know, the generalizing specialists,
that is going to persist and solidify. And there's actually a lot of science and research
that agrees with me on that one. But to be like us, when we grow up, from their context,
something specific, like a lot of times it'll be, Hey, I want to be like Alan and be a quality
coach when I grow up. You know what, honestly, I don't think that role exists in 25 years.
Right. It's something else. That's, and so part of me kind of wants to sit back and guide them
towards, you know what, that's a great North star. Let's see what happens. But let's start
talking through what's the most valuable thing to do in the next, in the next year towards that
goal. And then just sort of built, build in the, how do you stay adaptable? And that's where they
learned something every day and all that comes into play. And I think it's really critical.
My random two thoughts. There you go. I think there's a lot to that. It's just, I figure out,
you know, my, I've described my job for a long time, Mark, I'd love to hear your opinion on this
is I sort of figure out what's not getting done. And I have a good track record of figuring that
stuff out and having the solutions I put in place, whether it's coaching or, or dev work or whatever,
I tend to learn how to fill those holes. Yeah. I think of myself, kind of around the ideas of
inertia and entropy, like something isn't moving. I make it move. Something is moving too much. I
slow it down. I love that. I love that. I love that. So Brett mentioned coaching a little bit
and I wanted to ask you about this because there's a tagline on your website, which says,
I make people awesome. And what are some ways you make people awesome? Because I love that.
So I think over the 25 years, one of the biggest things that caught to me is this idea that,
maybe we should pay attention to the positive a little bit more.
It's kind of like a thing that test has come with that we notice a lot of bugs and things
that are wrong and things that need to be fixed. And that kind of feels the days. And at some point,
I realized that if there's a balance of more positive than negative that I notice, it's
probably going to be creating better results for me. It's moving me forward to the things that I
want to do. And I started really paying attention to all the things, not just the things that were
given to me by the trade that I was supposedly doing. So a lot of the turning people awesome
is working with them and telling them what they're good at and just turning up that
good that they have already. So giving them positive reinforcement. But also a lot of times,
it's like noticing things where we're doing good things and we don't appreciate them unless
someone tells that I've actually seen people do this elsewhere. And it wasn't that easy. Like you
made it look easy. And since my career has been one where I've been traveling different companies,
like every two, three years, I usually change companies and I go and help a new team grow in
some way. What is important is that the team is left better after I leave. So it's not about me
being there, but it's about them growing. So that seemed like a good way of phrasing what I do.
So I try to notice what's going on. This is, of course, what Brent and I talk a lot about with
modern testing. So it's just much more eloquent about it than we are. She very aptly kind of
described like she got really close, Martin, you got really close to multiple speeches that I've
given my own team. You're not a manager now, but I'll just tell you what you just described,
aptly describes my management style. I refer to myself as my employees MSP. I'm not their manager,
I'm their management service provider, which essentially means I don't fire them,
they fire me. They are my customers. My job is to provide management services and there are
distinct goals aligned with that. Anyway, I love that approach, I love that style.
My perspective is everybody already is awesome. It's sort of like when Michael Angelo described,
I think it was Michael Angelo, when he carved David. He didn't carve David from his marvel,
he pulled him out of the marvel. It was already there. It's just people couldn't see it, he could.
And that's kind of my approach as well. It sounds like that's your approach.
It's very much my approach for the short while when I was a manager myself.
It was interesting to notice how many people who should have been given raises before got them
while I was being a manager. So again, they kept telling me that the thing that I do is mostly
marketing. So definitely, the perspective is that it's already there, but someone needs to pay
attention to it and talk about it in a way that others also appreciate.
Yeah, the term servant leadership comes to mind, which I've read a lot from.
I almost said Steven Sinofsky, not it. Simon Sinek has written a lot about that and it's a
constant around for a while. But yeah, that's what I tell my team too. My job is to help you be
successful. It's about helping them be successful. Or I like his Brent put it, they're already
awesome. Help make them awesome or help highlight their awesomeness.
Pull it out.
Yeah, yeah. And something you said also, Marta, is as managers or as leaders, even if you're not
managing people, highlighting good things, highlighting awesomeness is really valuable.
Yeah, but it's also valuable for the people who get that appreciation,
but it's also valuable for the person giving that appreciation.
I find at least that for many of the steps that I found difficult to take,
kind of like growing and taking bigger roles and getting more responsibility,
it came with the positiveness. It came with enforcing some of that,
of course, still kind of fixing whatever is wrong, but noticing all the things that I did.
Your philosophies align so much with the things we've been talking about.
So I wanted to bring up something you put in Twitter a little while back.
And I'm sure you recall the tweet, but you said,
I'm reconsidering my position around the need of testers and teams.
And as a tester, I am not doing this lightly. I am starting to believe that with Agile and
learning cycles, developers get smart enough not to need manual testers around.
So what's up with that? I kind of want to hear more of the background on that and what led you
there and just more of your thoughts on that. I think that was around when I was changing jobs
and I was looking at my team that I was leaving behind. And I was looking at what the testers
needed to contribute at that point. And they really didn't need to contribute much.
And to some extent, when one of the testers then became a manager for the team
and started this months-long training into the management world and no longer had time to do any
of the testing, it became really obvious that the team wasn't really missing that.
So I started thinking around that tweet. I started thinking this idea that we talk so much
with other testers in the testing communities. We talk about this idea that it's so important
that someone like us is there. And actually, it's important that someone who cares is there,
but it doesn't have to be a tester. And I've seen so many awesome developers taking the role of
caring for quality and really building in quality and pulling in other people
for perspectives, including customers, all of that stuff, kind of like every different kind
of perspective that you might imagine. Not doing it alone, but being kind of the person who pulls.
It just feels like the framing that we still have, that you must put someone like us in.
It's a self-fulfilling prophecy. And then we carve the shape into a world team
that has still a place for us. Yeah, there's a lot of times. A lot of times.
So I've spent most of my career as a middle manager in test, although I keep saying that
and time keeps advancing. So I'm not even sure if that's true anymore.
Right. There's a, oh, you need more testers because you need more testers.
Right. It's sort of a cyclical argument. And so then, you know, what are you then
saying? Are you saying, and I'm going to be purposefully sarcastic and assertive here,
but are you saying that customers should be testing the code then? Or are you saying,
are you, you know, as we all know, Dev can't be objective. So, you know, it seems like you're
saying it's okay to ship bugs. I don't know. I feel like devs can be a lot more objective than we give
them credit for, especially since they work in these short cycles nowadays, where you put things
in production and you have telemetry where you're looking at how is it actually behaving in the
customer's hands and you care about it even after you delivered it. So it's not like hack and leave,
but it's much more kind of like continuously building it and making it something that is
worthwhile the time that you put into that. So what I'm mostly saying is, is this idea that
it really doesn't matter that we would have these specialist testers in our teams. It matters
that we have teams and that in the teams, we can collaborate with the other people. And what
maybe concerns me most is this idea that, you know, 25 years ago, you talked about this idea
that the world was a very different place when we started, when I started growing into being a
tester. I'd still like to give new people chances of learning software development, like I learned
by doing it in the companies, taking smaller roles and then bigger roles. And that's kind of the
position that I leave for junior developers and testers, junior testers as well. Kind of like,
you know, getting into some of the easier work first and then very quickly growing
into different directions. A million percent agree. Part of my agreement statement is that
I have data, I have helped hundreds of developers now learn how to become pretty good testers. Some
became great testers, some not as good, but they can learn it and they can be objective.
I think I've mentioned most people know that on my team, we don't have any, I'll ask for assistance
in a second. We don't have testers. We don't have a dedicated QA team. I do have two people on my
team with extensive experience in testing and quality who function as quality coaches for various
parts of the team. Because what I've found, and I'm curious what you found here too, is
like my boss will ask me, how is our team doing at testing? And I'll say,
they're doing all the testing they know how to do, which is good because they're not afraid of it.
They're doing testing, they're running tests, they're running lots of tests and not just
unit tests. They're actually really testing for things. But as you know, I think you'd agree,
there's always more they could be doing. Other ways to think about approaching testing,
other test ideas they could use. So we try and help them continually get a few more of those,
get them used to evaluating risks so they can figure out which those tests are most important.
That's an ongoing learning, I don't want to say struggle, ongoing learning challenge.
But curious what you think about that, David Bart.
For me, it's been more on this idea that it's very easy in the team to get in this crunch mode of
you just do whatever you know that you need to do and you do a little bit more of that
and then some more and continuously deliver something. Whereas stopping for purposes of
quality or for any purposes of growing is not as straightforward for people as they would like
to think it is. So whether it's a quality coach or some other kind of coach, making space for that
learning that enables you to grow so much, you can grow in the way that you can be a better
version of yourself. So I often kind of refer to this math idea that if you're 1% better every
single day and 365 days a year, then you're 37.6 times better than you were yourself a year ago.
So nothing is as powerful as learning. And sometimes looking at software development teams,
I think the quality related aspect that I bring in is this encouragement that
striving for something better and collecting ideas all around is worthwhile effort as well,
not just crunching code and crunching features and crunching testing into production. So whether
it's a quality coach or something else, I don't really care. I think people have interests that
drive them more towards testing type of roles first, and then growing from there. And I think
it would be a shame if we lost all of that potential that we have in those people who
right now doing testing roles. But when I'm teaching new people, like I right now, I have a complete newbie
for this summer. She's my kind of like experiment guinea pig. I'm doing all kinds of things with her
and reporting on my results. The way that I teach her is already a mix of programming and testing.
And it's already kind of like, you know, you go and fix things, you don't just report them,
you're always balancing the idea that would you already would this already be a good stretch for
you to fix rather than just report and then run away and leave for developers. I love that.
Yeah, I love that. I think that's the right way to train. I do think anyone in today's world that
is highlighting that a testers job is to report is saying they're doing a disservice for the younger
testers is just a huge under exaggeration. There's in my mind, there's an element of
of it. It's immoral to do such a thing in to those younger testers in today's environment.
Right. That world is I don't want to re execute the test is dead meme. But that world is very
rapidly ending where that sufficient. And I was thinking through additional what you said,
because it reminds me, like what I see Marit doing is sort of she's, she's living.
She's sort of a living personification of agility in today's world. She's like, okay, I'm going to
help encourage collaboration, I'm going to help encourage bringing out the best of folks, I'm going
to help encourage ideas. She's mentioned short cycles, right? And sort of evaluating the ROI of
how people are contributing towards these goals. And she does it with a gentle touch. I think this
is just absolutely fantastic. For me, and being the thing I discovered is that the short cycles is
what really, really sort of motivated Dev has this talent, the problem is, they've never been
motivated to use it. Right. The but the short cycles does that. Right. It in being I said this
over and over again, in being we had the ability within 15 minutes, a check in would be in prod.
And under under, under version control or version flighting in a dev would know within another 15
minutes of how key metrics are performing in and whether or not their feature got pushed to the
next bigger flight. And in that world with fast feedback, it's really hard to argue for, you know,
large test teams with sort of a proactive or prevented, you know, prevent this thing from
shipping mentality. That's let me rewind your stack just a little bit. I want to highlight
one thing from Marat that's that could potentially get I do see it get missed on teams.
Teams can get addicted to the iteration. Teams can focus so much on deploying 50 times a day
that they don't take the time to learn. And something I bring up a lot too is like you said,
that 1% every day ends up being a pretty big improvement over the year. It's we had a episode
three or four ago on retrospectives and reminding people, don't try and overhaul the team,
but take some time frequently. I think it's the 12th agile principle and just try and get a little
bit better. I asked teams, don't pick one or two or three things to improve. Pick just one. Start with
one. Pick one thing to improve this week and try and do a little bit better than you did before.
You do it at the team level, at the individual level. But I love emphasizing the learning
because the quality and the agility and the predictability and the delivery cadence
are going to improve from that probably more than anything else.
I think pretty much for all of my career, I focused on exploratory testing. That's the thing
that I'm always looking at. And over the years, I've really found learning to be the core of it.
The kind of like looking at the application or whatever you're looking at. And it's kind of like
your external imagination. It's speaking to you. It's telling you what to click and what kind of
things to do and where to use your time. And kind of this active learning while you're doing things
as an attitude. It's the same way that you can approach anything with a learning mindset.
So I find that it's become really key to whatever I work on is to look at the way I learn
and look at how others learn. And in the last five years with the pair programming and
mob programming, which I nowadays like to call ensemble programming. I saw that. Yeah. It's been
really great way of not just speculating with other people what they were thinking while they
were testing, but actually seeing if their actions match what they claim they're thinking.
So working together and actually testing together is a lot more powerful way of learning about
how we learn while we test than anything else I've done before.
I want to talk with you about mob programming, but I'm going to put a pin in that for just a
second because it's not just the tweet I quoted earlier. I wanted to talk about there's a
follow-up reply, which I get all the time. I talk about modern testing and how I've helped
teams move to having no or few testers on their team. People inevitably come up to me after these
talks or after I post something and they say, Hey, this is all great. I'm glad it worked for you,
but my developers don't want to test. And they, for whatever reason, they don't feel like it's
their job. They prefer having a tester to test their work, which I think is pretty close to the
statement someone said to you. And then something I've saved because it's a great answer is you said
in reply to that, I'd like to have a personal assistant around too, whether I need one or
whether it makes sense for my company's business is another thing, which is much more eloquent and
well put than any of the sarcastic, flippant answers I've given to that question.
Yeah, it goes into the sarcastic flippant answers category, definitely. But sometimes I feel like,
you know, that some of the developers that I work with are like people who come to our living room,
we eat dinner together, we eat pizza, and then they leave the pizza boxes around.
They assume someone else is supposed to pick up the pizza boxes. It's just, you know, garbage
magically goes away without you doing anything. And not realizing that it's an actual work,
there's a lot of labor going into, you know, keeping the place tidy and, and remembering
which notes are still untied. I don't appreciate leaving that to me. And I think it might also,
you know, other things around the the idea that, well, we do notice, it's hard not to notice that
my team right now is 50% female. And we have me, the summer trainee, who is a woman, and our UX
person who's a woman, whereas the other three people, the men are the the so called developers.
So a lot of times we get also kind of typecasted a little bit into this, almost like a secretarial
role. And I feel there's so much more that we can do in testing that it's almost like, you know,
it's my responsibility of saying that I'm no one secretary anymore. If I
I kind of almost based on what you just said, I kind of almost I love that that pizza box metaphor.
But I kind of wish I could temporarily go back to test just to use this new line
that you inspired. And it's essentially, I want to be able to tell the developer, look,
I am not your mother. Clean up your own damn mess.
Well, it goes back to her comment earlier about not being the I mean, even in her current role,
she can't be the bottleneck to do their work for them when when she's there.
Of course, they're doing it better and they have more ideas and she's accelerating
what they can do. But if she's gone speaking at a conference or enjoying the two weeks of
finished summer, that was my slight little dig on Finland. But it's okay, I have enough
finished employees to pull that off. But she can be gone and stuff can keep on happening.
If you rely on your testing like I've had cases in the past and Brent, I'm sure you remember these,
like, oh, we couldn't deploy because the tester was on vacation.
Yeah, the I mean, those happened rarely. There is a lot on that one. It's like the the the
fact that it's interesting, the fact that my team can survive when she goes off the
conference is probably right. I think about my my my metaphor around type work blocking.
Right. Hey, she was gone. The safety net disappeared. And it just so happened no one fell
this time. Right. I think through how we make this more purposeful, how do we make it?
How do we change the conversation like testing is Dev's job. That's the statement I want to make in
and everyone else who's who's trained in this. Our job is to help teach those people how to succeed
in that, in that world in that constraint in that change. That's the change. Right.
Short cycles is one of them because people I think that's a great way to sort of change the
environment. So you don't have to have this this conversation head on, which often ends up being
very polarizing. But if you can, if you can shift it to various short cycles and hey, look,
you you get way more way more feedback in shorter time than an army of testers could have provided
you. Right. And now let's figure out how we take advantage of it. How do we even how do we reduce
that cycle time even further? And then it becomes a conversation around. All right. How do we change
the direction around adaptability? Are we going in the right direction? That's the the heart when
you brought up the iteration stuff earlier, Alan. That's the thing I see is the problem. We
we get used to these super short cycles and it's kind of like going hiking and you're hunched over
and you're looking straight down at the ground. Right. You don't you lose your sense of where
you're trying to go with that and with it with so you still have to sort of maintain that hey,
put your head up every once in a while making sure you're heading you're still not heading
straight forward the edge of the cliff. Anyway, enough of that. I love having Marit on here.
I'm actually looking I was looking at her website. I'm looking at an article right now
that she published in 2003 titled and she's like, oh, dear God, what is she what is he bringing up
titled increasing understanding of the modern testing perspective in software
product development projects? Well, that predates our use of modern testing. Oh, well.
Right. She even has an MTP there, right? The modern testing perspective.
I do want to highlight the and I'll put some links to this when I post this. But just as I said
earlier, a massive body of work. You have a page even on not even you have a ebook on exploratory
testing. You have a page with I forget what it's called, but it's exploratory testing notes,
but it's links to it's like you've collected all of your articles and I thoughts on exploratory
tests. Put them on one page massively valuable. But there's one thing I wanted to talk about
as I put opinion earlier. It's something that I have other than watching your presentations on it,
really no experience. I want to spend a little bit of time talking about
mob programming and mob testing. I've done pair programming and pair testing, but
and I've seen your demos of mob, but I'd like to know a little bit more about how you like,
where did this come from and what's been your success and with that and
and when and why should teams try mob programming?
Five years ago, I organized a conference, by the way, conference organizing
awesome thing to learn new things. And I needed a keynote. So I invited a guy called Woody Zuille
all the way from somewhere around the ocean, US based. And he would fly to Finland to Tampere
and he would talk to us for 45 minutes about this crazy idea that you would have a whole
group of people on a single computer. They would only be allowed to use that one single computer
and they would all be working together on the same code at the same time in the same space.
And I thought it was the most ridiculous thing I've ever heard.
And one of the things that I've learned about learning is that emotions and how I feel about
things is very much of a kind of a thing that you need to listen to. So when you have a strong
emotion, even if it's kind of like, this is ridiculous, saying it's ridiculous without having
any experience on that yourself, doesn't feel like the right thing to do. It's kind of like,
it's not as thorough or honest as I would like to kind of hold myself to.
So I went to my team and said, I'd like to try this thing. I just learned in a conference.
They pretty much laughed me out. Like, no way we're going to try that. Over six months, I found
the argument with my then team that, you know, humor me, do this just to keep me happy.
And we started doing it so that we would do it every two weeks for a couple of hours.
And at first, I was convinced I'm going to hate it. Like, I wrote this blog post where I talk about
this idea that I will hate it. Like, I have to spend so much time on this boring code and I don't
get to do any of this interesting, you know, user oriented exploration. And then it was really
funny to read my own notes because I was publicly blogging all the way through this kind of like
how I really changed my mind about this whole idea of sitting there and sneaky, you know,
saying like, we have been half an hour using the same browser, maybe we should open it in a
different browser. And all of a sudden, nothing worked. So kind of like, you know, anything that
I would want to try, I could introduce it into that group at that moment. And when we had so many
things where I could kind of report that we avoided mistakes, and we could do things that we
estimated was going to take us like 40 days, we could do it in a day and a half instead.
It started making a lot more sense to me that we would do this. So I took it from there to open
space conferences, I learned about how to teach and learn testing in this format. And I've been
doing a lot of testing courses, this is basically my go to way of teaching testing nowadays to anyone
is just getting them sitting together and doing testing and just giving them different kind of
problems and constraints. And you get them learning a little bit different perspectives.
That's so cool. You made it sound so fun. I have a follow up question. And well, actually,
two follow up questions. One is, you, even though you thought it was ridiculous and figured it wasn't
going to work, you tried it anyway. What gave you the courage to like, what advice do you have
for people who may feel the same way? I think there's been many things in my career so far
that I feel that they are ridiculous. Like, for example, I've gone on books saying continuous
integration is insane. That was way back in the days. Can you just briefly summarize
why that was your perspective? I can just briefly. About 25 years ago, it felt like you needed to
control change, that you could test anything you needed to slow down change so that you could know
what you tested. And I was convinced for some reason that instead of giving me the control that
I now know it gives me, that it was taking away all the control that we thought we had back then.
And I was convinced it was the worst idea ever for a while. And it's fine that I was wrong.
But I have so many of these examples where something that turned out to be kind of core
to the way that I think of things after I kind of give it a chance and learn more about it.
And that was what took me into more programming as well. So a lot of times,
the idea of judging something you have never experienced, well, it's just not a good way of
living. Yeah, I think that reflects back on a lot of things we've talked about today.
But I love that. I think that's good advice for anyone listening, anyone who's
newer in the industry is you have to get over that fear of trying new stuff. And maybe it fails for
you. Maybe it doesn't work. You will still learn something. And that's really valuable.
My other follow up question to that is, have you tried mob programming or mob testing in a fully
remote setting? Or does it work better if everyone's actually in the same room?
We do a lot of that in remote setting, especially nowadays when people are just forced to.
There's definitely context for my question.
Yeah. So I've definitely experienced that it's easier to get started in a room. Like reading
the room is so much easier. But the basic rules of rather having your camera on and
making sure it's easy to change who is holding control of the keyboard, you can get it to work
remotely quite as well as anywhere else. And again, if you already know how to work with that group,
then it usually works out just as fine in a remote setting.
Yeah, I'm going to commit to trying that. It may just be a feature or a sort of a hack project or
something in our deployment pipeline, but I'm going to figure out how we can do that. I think
my feeling is I'm a little afraid. People would like, I'm not afraid of it working or not.
My fear is that not that I will think it's ridiculous, but everybody I invite to do it
with me will think it's ridiculous. But I want to try it anyway.
You join us. We're trying that next week, Robot Framework Community, which is Finland based
community. They just created a playwright library. And well, one of my old colleagues is working on
that, that Robot Framework Playwright Library. And he was worried that he's not getting any
feedback for his library. So I kind of called it out on him that we could mop together and let anyone
who wants to join us, then join us. And this is pretty much how I learn most of my things nowadays.
I just go on Twitter and say, hey, I want to do this thing with you. Who's volunteering this time?
And I've done sessions, both group sessions and pair sessions with people all around the world.
I like to think of myself as a lifelong learner and I challenge myself to learn new things.
I'm learning Rust right now just for the heck of it. But I have never met someone so proactive and
I'll say aggressive about learning new things consistently. I think a lot of us want to be more
like that. You don't stop. I think you're motivated by, maybe you told me I'm wrong,
learning for you is a motivator. It's, dare I say, an addiction.
It's almost an addiction. Yes. It's so cool.
Her last idea, I was just like, for me, so the mob programming. So I run a data science team,
but we do a full stack. So we do data science development and testing now.
And this, one of the speeches I tell my team is the three most important things to me.
And number one, business value. Number two, calendar time, because it's the one resource
that I can't scale once it's lost, it's lost. And then lastly, engineering time.
And investment in learning is really critical, particularly when we're in the knowledge worker
space, which all of us are. This idea that, that, okay, all three of us have 25 years of experience,
but this subconscious idea that we all have, that any of it is still relevant today is something
that you have to battle. Right. I constantly go, okay, this is what my gut says I should do this,
but is it really right? The world's changed. But this idea that you just did around mob programming
in an internet context is fantastic because it creates sort of a safe environment. For me,
it's the risk adversity. What's the risk of taking? I have a big team. If I spend them all on this
and it results in an ROI, right? It's the risk of uncertainty. But what you just shared is,
no, no, no, no, no, just find some random open source thing that you love and,
and call out the Twitter. Hey, does anyone want to try this with me? It's then the only thing
that you sacrifice is your time. I think that's a fantastic idea. I think a lot of the new ideas,
I think the biggest blocker to learning on this front is risk adversity.
People, you know, what happens if it's fear? What happens if we spend that time and it doesn't work?
That's what Mar is, is she's fearless.
I think more than she's taken her head no, but all right.
Yeah. I think more than that, she's figured out how to sort of with, with any sort of agile
approach, it's not an all or nothing. It is basically, all right, try a little bit and then
let's, let's pivot or let's pivot from those learning. So she's doing a small batch learning.
Yeah. So I'm going to interrupt you and let Mar close us out here. But, uh, I mentioned Philip
Armour's, uh, five orders of ignorance a lot, and they really come down to you need to have
in order to learn for learning, for knowledge acquisition to happen, you need to have a suitable
environment to discover what you don't know, you don't know. And these mob programming sessions are
a prime example of that. I want to do one last challenge to, to Mara, not challenging her
perspective. It is a, I challenge Mar to do this because I think she's one of the few people
in the world that can. So you have a lot of experience of exploratory testing, write a book
around exploratory development. That's all I'm going to say. I think you understand what that
means even more than what I do, but I think that's the thing the world needs. That's my challenge.
We'll wait a couple of years and see what you do with it. All right. Okay. So we need to wrap up
here, but man, this has been great. I thank you for, thank you for coming out of the show. Thank
you for letting me ask my own questions. Um, I, I feel like it was a good conversation, but
what, uh, what message, what other message or something we didn't talk about or how do you,
how would you like to close out our podcast today? What do you want to say?
Oh, that's a hard question. Hard one in the end. Yes. So again,
I think all of the stuff that we've been talking about today is really centered around learning
and trying out different kinds of things. I really love what Brent was talking about on the
short cycles. And I wish we would have had more time to, you know, geek out on the short cycles
and how those change the organization. And what are you doing in two weeks?
Brent, I managed the calendar, but yeah, you're definitely welcome back anytime.
All right. We can talk about that later, but, uh, this whole idea of figuring out the best ways to
learn and sharing in the community sense. I think that's kind of my call to action that I always
have to people. I don't have all the answers. A lot of the answers that I have nowadays came
from people who reached out to me and wanted to have a chat. And, and that's kind of the,
the power of, of having people all around the world who want to figure this stuff out.
So if there are any people who are kind of into this stuff, I would be happy to, you know,
do some work, uh, do some mobbing, do some pair programming, do some pair testing, whatever it is,
uh, with, with random people and be open to learning much more new things, uh, in the world as well.
I will put links to Twitter blogs, website, everything I, hopefully I remember here, uh,
Marit Puhyadavi. Uh, thank you for joining us. Uh, have a, have a great, uh, weekend.
Hopefully the sun stays out. Thanks again for being here and thanks Brent for, for chiming in.
Lots of good ideas. I feel like we've only begun to talk, but we can, yeah, we'll, we'll have you
back another time. If you have anything else you want to elaborate on, we'd love to have you.
Thanks. And we'll see you next time.